
While a missed period seems to be one of the most classic early pregnancy symptoms, there are actually a ton of other signs that a positive pregnancy test may be in your future. We asked our readers what some of their signs and symptoms of early pregnancy were, and some of the answers may surprise you. Check out these 23 early signs and symptoms of pregnancy to see if any of them sound familiar.Early Pregnancy Symptoms Checklist1. Skipped PeriodYou’ve seen it in the movies. You’ve read it in books. It happened to your mom, your sister, and your best friend. Her period was several days late, and that’s when she knew something was up. A week after her missed period, she took a test and her suspicions were confirmed – she was pregnant. A missed period is definitely a pretty good sign that you may be pregnant, but if you have irregular cycles, this sign may be easy to miss.2. Cramping and Implantation BleedingAbout 25% of women have experienced light bleeding 6-12 days after conception. As the egg implants into a woman’s uterine lining, it can cause irritation and bleeding. As well, increased blood flow to the uterus during early pregnancy can cause cramping, similar to period cramping.3. Sore Boobs Or NipplesSore boobs and/or nipples are one of the most common symptoms of early pregnancy. You might start feeling these changes in your breasts any time from 1-2 weeks after conception.These sensations might go away after a week or so, or they might last until the baby arrives. You can thank the amped up production of estrogen and progesterone for this. Increased blood flow is also making your boobs grow larger.4. Food/Smell Aversions or Heightened Sense of SmellIf the smell of raw meat or your co-worker’s perfume is sending you running for the hills, you’re not alone.A lot of folks have also mentioned that the sudden retching at the smell and taste of coffee was one of the first things to set off their pregnancy radar.There’s a theory that the aversion to coffee (and other potentially harmful foods, such as raw meat) is the body’s way of protecting the fetus from substances that may affect its development. The production of pregnancy hormones (specifically estrogen in this case), are the culprits for this early pregnancy symptom.5. Metallic or Sour Taste in the MouthUnless you’ve been sucking on an old penny, you may be experiencing a pregnancy symptom called dysgeusia. The hormone estrogen helps to control and moderate your sense of taste.When pregnancy causes estrogen to surge, things start to get a little wonky in the taste department. It’s also been suggested that prenatal vitamins may play a role in bringing on that weird, metallic taste.6. Nausea and VomitingNausea and vomiting (also lovingly but totally inaccurately referred to as morning sickness) often go hand-in-hand with a heightened sense of smell brought on by pregnancy hormones.As anyone who has experienced it will tell you, morning sickness can strike during any time of the day or night. For many, this symptom subsides by the second trimester, but some sad souls are stuck with it for the majority of their pregnancies.Severe nausea and vomiting that just won’t bugger off is known as hyperemesis gravidarum. At its worst, it can cause dehydration, vitamin and mineral deficits and weight loss.Related: When Does Morning Sickness Start (and End)? and 15 Natural Morning Sickness Remedies for the First Trimester and Beyond7. HungerAre you suddenly ravenously hungry and no amount of pickle and ketchup covered mac and cheese will do the trick?Pregnancy hormones cause an increase in metabolism that allows your body to use up caloric energy more efficiently. This doesn’t actually mean you require a ton more calories, even though it may be hard not to consume them.As your pregnancy continues, your growing baby will need more nourishment, which will likely impact your appetite as well. "Pass the potatoes." We have an interesting post called Pregnancy Weight Gain Guidelines: Where Did They Come From, Anyway? 8. CravingsIf you’re suddenly in the mood for something you’ve never enjoyed before, you’re not alone.There isn’t really a definitive reason for pregnancy cravings, but like everything else, it’s probably related to your changing hormones. Certain foods may just bring comfort to you as you experience changes to your body, or the hard work your body is doing to produce more blood may be making you hungry.For my first pregnancy, I couldn't get enough of salty stuff (chips, fries, etc.) and with my second, it was sour (lemonade, sour patch kids, kimchi, etc.)9. FatigueTo help your baby get the nutrients it needs to grow, your body amps up blood production. In addition, your blood sugar and blood pressure decrease during pregnancy thanks to your soaring estrogen and progesterone levels.All of these changes in your body are effing exhausting, so if you’re lucky and can catch a few z’s during the day, find a safe place to do it (aka not while driving home from work), and get snoozin.10. InsomniaOn the flip side of pregnancy fatigue is insomnia related to pregnancy. As a direct side effect of daytime napping thanks to the high levels of progesterone that make them sleepy, many pregnant women have a hard time falling asleep at night. Even without daytime naps, those hormonal shifts can make it hard to fall asleep or stay asleep. Add in that never ending urge to pee, and a good night’s sleep can become pretty hard to come by. 44% of women have reported experiencing insomnia during the first trimester of pregnancy, although it was more common in women who had sleep difficulties prior to becoming pregnant.11. Intense DreamsMany women have mentioned that pregnancy brought on dreams that were more vivid or intense than they had before. Surges in pregnancy hormones are, once again, probably the culprit here. As well, those extra hours of sleep thanks to pregnancy fatigue create more opportunities to churn out dreams of all sorts.Finally, remembering dreams is related to recency. Since pregnant mamas are waking more throughout the night (to pee, in response to a baby’s movement, to change positions and everything in between), they are more likely to remember more of their dreams than they would be had they had a solid night’s sleep.12. Night Sweats Or Feeling HotThe part of the brain that’s in charge of regulating heat is at the mercy of ever-changing pregnancy hormones.Rapid changes in estrogen as well as increased blood flow can cause an increase in body temperature, which your body might take as a cue to sweat so hard you could lube up a slip ‘n slide. Increased progesterone levels raise your basal body temperature, and the increase in your metabolic rate can also cause you to feel warmer.If you take this as your cue to lounge in an ice cold kiddie pool no matter what time of year you’re pregnant, no one’s gonna judge.13. HeadachesThe combination of headaches and pregnancy fatigue may have your head throbbing. Talk to your doctor about safe ways to combat pregnancy headaches if drinking extra water and getting more rest aren’t doing the trick.Note: If you have a strong headache that’s not relieved by Tylenol and LOTS of water (3-4 large glasses of water, all at once) give your doc a call. It could just be a headache, or it could be the beginning of Preeclampsia which is no picnic.Take a second to check out: 12 Dangerous Pregnancy Symptoms You Shouldn't Ignore and Scary Shit Series – Preeclampsia so you know what to keep an eye on. 14. Lots of PeeingIn pregnancy, the peeing just never stops. The hCG hormone, produced by the cells in the placenta, nurtures and feeds the embryo attached to your uterine lining. It’s also the hormone that will give you a positive result on a pregnancy test, and, apparently, make you pee all day and night. As your baby grows, it’ll start pressing on your bladder, also giving you the urge to pee a hundred times a day. Enjoy!15. ConstipationAn increase in progesterone causes the smooth muscles of your intestinal wall and stomach to relax. This slows down digestion, and increases blood volume, and can lead to constipation.Once an egg implants into the uterine wall, hCG production begins. Your progesterone levels rise, which allows your uterine lining to grow. While this is obviously necessary and beneficial for the healthy development of your baby, it can also create some problems for you in the bathroom department.For example, if you don’t drink enough fluid to compensate for the increased blood volume in your pregnant body, you’ll be dehydrated. If you become dehydrated, constipation will likely follow. Although you may be tempted to cut back on the fluids since you’re already peeing every 10 minutes, don’t. Unless you want to be constipated, in which case, party on.We've got a post – Constipation During Pregnancy – that will give you more details.16. Blue Toilet SeatsYep, you read that right. Some magical ladies develop the ability to turn their toilet seats blue when they become pregnant. Nobody really knows why, but it actually has more to do with their pregnancy hormones than the dye in their new maternity jeans. The elevated levels of estrogen and progesterone may change the pH of a pregnant woman’s skin, which then interacts with the ionized silver antimicrobial coating of their toilet seats, turning them a lovely shade of Smurf.17. Changes in SkinHey, pregnancy hormones, while you’re busy doing all your work inside our bodies, why not bless us with a little acne as well?An increase in androgens can cause your skin glands to grow and produce more oily and waxy sebum. While some people might refer to this as a pregnancy glow, others might just get to revisit the breakouts from their teenage years they thought they’d left behind.I've got a fun post called, WTF is Pregnancy Doing to my Skin?18. BreathlessnessHave you found yourself huffing and puffing during physical activity that never seemed to bother you before? 60-70% of pregnant women have reported experiencing shortness of breath during pregnancy. Bet you can’t guess who’s the culprit here! Just kidding, of course you can. Pregnancy hormones! Progesterone is a respiratory stimulant that makes you breathe faster. As your body produces more of this hormone, you’ll probably find yourself taking more breaths than usual. Don’t forget, you’re now sharing your oxygen supply with your growing babe, meaning there’s less oxygen to go around, and this may take some getting used to. In addition, as your baby grows larger, your diaphragm may rise up to 4 centimetres, making it hard to take deep, full breaths. Take your time, take a breath, and if you’re concerned about pregnancy breathlessness, who ya gonna call? Your doctor!19. Mood SwingsSome Pregnant Chicken readers said that their partners had to take cover during some pretty intense periods of frustration and annoyance thanks to pregnancy mood swings. Others reported bursting into tears during TV commercials or after seeing a particularly cute puppy walk by.Whatever the reaction and whatever the trigger, pregnancy mood swings are no joke and can come on hard and fast due to a few different factors.First of all, changes in estrogen and progesterone levels impact neurotransmitters, which are brain chemicals in charge of regulating mood.Fatigue and the physical stress of growing a human can also take a toll on a pregnant person’s mood. (Go figure.)Finally, there are some very real worries that come along with the prospect of parenthood, like what kind of parent you’ll be, what birth will be like, how you’re going to afford a baby, and what changes for your life are in store.While pregnancy mood swings are totally normal, particularly between weeks 6-10 and in the third trimester, keep an eye out for symptoms of depression and anxiety during pregnancy (such as crying spells, inability to sleep, loss of interest in life, withdrawal, feelings of worthlessness or hopelessness or panic attacks). If you can’t shake some of these symptoms, don’t hesitate to talk to your doctor to seek help.Here are three really helpful posts about prenatal depression, signs of postpartum anxiety and a fun one on the reasons pregnant women cry.20. Baby BrainLost your keys again? Just can’t remember the name of that pregnancy vitamin you were supposed to take? Put your purse in the refrigerator?Baby brain/pregnancy fog/forgetfulness/whatever you want to call it is a pretty normal symptom of pregnancy. Your body’s increased production of progesterone, a calming hormone, can have the side effect of making you a little more forgetful or foggy than you were pre-pregnancy.Plus, oh I don't know, you might be a little distracted by building a person from scratch and the risks and responsibilities that go with it. Hard to say.Either way, cut yourself a break and feel free to 'forget' to go to your cousin's spoken word poetry reading.21. Changes to Your Immune SystemContrary to popular belief, getting sick more than usual isn’t due to a weakened immune system during pregnancy. Your immune system actually goes through a rollercoaster of changes for 9 months to allow for the healthy growth of a baby.For the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, the immune system is heightened. Immune cells flood the lining of the uterus, causing inflammation, which actually helps the embryo to implant.For the next 15 weeks, the immune system is repressed. This allows the cells of the fetus to grow and develop.After this period, the immune system ramps up again to help aid in the labor response.As your immune system is going through all of these ups and downs, you’re more likely to get sick. Who needs an amusement park, anyway?22. Sore or Swollen GumsHormone changes can bring on a lot of pregnancy surprises you’d never expect. For some of you, pregnancy gingivitis will be one.In addition to increased gum sensitivity, the changes in your hormones can impact your body’s response to bacteria, increasing your chance of getting infections in your gums.Don’t skip out on the dentist just because you’re pregnant – try to schedule at least one visit for a checkup to ensure that your teeth and gums stay healthy (plus, scheduling a dental appointment with a newborn is no easy feat!) Be sure to tell your dentist that you're pregnant as well.Also check out: Five People Who Should Know You're Pregnant23. HeartburnPrepare to feel the burn in pregnancy. The heartburn, that is.The hormone that helps to expand your uterus (our friend progesterone) also relaxes the valve between your esophagus and stomach, resulting in heartburn.Check out What Helps Pregnancy Heartburn? to get some relief.Summary of Early Pregnancy SymptomsThere are tons of signs of symptoms of early pregnancy. Some lucky folks experience all of them, and some experience none and have no idea they are pregnant until they give birth in a line at the bank. The only surefire way to tell if you're pregnant is to take a pregnancy test, but many of these ailments give you a clue it might be time for a trip to the drugstore.Did you experience any of these early pregnancy signs and symptoms? Are there others that we missed? Fill us in in the comments!Our next reco: Pregnancy Calendar Week 1- 42


Congratulations! You're expecting a baby and, if you're anything like me, you are like, "wtf do I need to do?".There are tons of printables for what to get for a baby or what to pack in your hospital bag but there aren't many places that outline allll the stuff you need to do before you bring a baby home.The Countdown to Baby Prep Kit is a series of checklists broken down into each task so you don't feel like you're drinking from a fire hose. You don't have to do it all – and you can definitely go nuts –but it will cover your bases and get you ready to welcome a new baby into your life. The kit is all lists and checklists – no journal, no filler, and no random graphics that use extra paper.It's a 30 page letter sized (8.5" x 11") PDF file that you can pop in a binder or split with a partner.The Countdown to Baby Prep Kit includes:CoverIntroTable of ContentsBaby Prep Stage OneMaternity Clothes ChecklistBaby task listBaby Boy NamesBaby Girl NamesNew Baby ChecklistBorrowed item tracking listHospital Bag ChecklistGift trackerPostpartum watchPostpartum plannerBirth team questions listBaby Prep Stage TwoBirth Preference DiscussionBirth PreferencesBaby Prep Stage threeNursery LayoutSafe Sleep Space ChecklistBaby Proofing ChecklistEmergency infoCall ListAnnouncementNotesEach checklist can be printed multiple times if you need more copies or not printed at all if it doesn't apply.Includes an online page for recommendations on apps, baby registries, birth classes and free resources.Is this baby prep kit right for you?If you're big on checklists and not keen on wading through a bunch of filler, this kit will give you a holistic view to help you decide if and what rabbit holes you want to go down.My goal was to be 'clean and concise' so you feel prepared but not overwhelmed. You can let me know how I did.

You can also find the kit on Etsy.Visit the shop: Check out the rest of the shop for more goodies here


Post contains affiliate links. See our disclosure.Nobody knows what causes morning sickness (or in some cases, all-frickin’-day sickness) and sadly there’s no one size fits all morning sickness remedy that works for everybody. Typically, this is when my grandmother would have chimed in to say “If men had this you know damn well they’d have it figured out by now.” True enough.Either way, nearly three-quarters of pregnant women have morning sickness at some point during their pregnancy. The symptoms often show up in the first trimester thanks to a raging cocktail of pregnancy hormones coursing through your veins. It is more common in first pregnancies but can also happen in subsequent pregnancies.The most common treatment for morning sickness is “suck it up, Buttercup” which is always nice advice to give along with eating leafy greens and deep breathing – easy for people to say when it isn’t them who's suffering from it. It’s important to note that morning sickness is not hyperemesis gravidarum, which is like morning sickness on steroids. You can read more about that here.Here's a list of morning sickness remedies, hacks and products to get on your radar.





Natural Morning Sickness Remedies:Anything gingerIt sounds like this is the go-to herb to quell the barfs. Anything from ginger ale, ginger snaps, candied ginger to boiling fresh ginger in water with a bit of honey to make ginger tea – sounds very hippyish which makes me think this last one might work. These ginger candies also got very high praise.Taking a B6 supplement25 milligrams of vitamin B6 (also called pyridoxine) three times a day, for three days - so 75mg per day - is supposed to reduce nausea and vomiting associated with pregnancy, although they don’t know why.Sour stuffWhen life hands you lemons in the form of morning sickness, make lemonade? For a fresh take on morning sickness remedies, lemons squeezed in water and lemonade popsicles seem to help some people. Sour Patch Kids got a lot of votes from readers.Don’t get hungry & eat oftenEat all the time to keep low blood sugar at bay. Even keep something like crackers on your bedside to nibble on before you get up in the morning. Have a snack every hour or two, keeping the servings small. I like this one. Gum chewing was up there on everyone’s list too. A few people recommended Pür gum if you’re trying to avoid aspartame and sugar.Sniff stuffSome people really respond to aromatherapy. This Expecting inhaler from Soothing Scents is nice because you can take a whiff whenever you need it. Sniffing lemons was recommended in a few places too, or you can find an essential oil that perks you up.Take your prenatal vitamins with food to help them stay downEven a cracker will do the trick. Taking them before you go to bed also helped lessen the barfs because you are sleeping when the queasy normally hits.Avoid fried, fatty foodsOkay, they need to back the hell off with this one because they’re not even sure if it does anything which makes me think they’re just trying to get all preachy about what you should eat. That said, I’ve included it because it did come up a few times. Dumb.Protein-rich snack before bedThis will help keep your blood sugar up during the night and might stave off a wave of 'ew' the next day.Cider vinegarSupposedly drinking 1 tablespoon of apple cider vinegar and 1 tablespoon honey in cold water before bed is helpful. Personally, I think this would *make* me barf.Increase the iron-rich foods in your dietFoods such as beef, sardines, eggs, dried fruit and green leafy vegetables. There's also something called the Lucky Iron Fish that may help (and it's easy on your stomach).Iron-Deficient Anemia and The Lucky Iron FishIron-deficient anemia is a common issue and finding an Iron supplement that you tolerate can be tricky. The Lucky Iron Fish is an easy way to up your iron.Pregnant ChickenEmily RamirezThe BRAT dietBananas, rice, applesauce, toast and tea - bland foods that are easy on the tummy, but more than just saltines. Potatoes and pretzels also got a nod as bland foods that people could keep down. And if nothing of substance will do, there’s always broth.Sucking on lollipopsI think this will also increase your street cred but I’m not sure. I sucked on Preggie Pops when I was pregnant and LOVED them. They have a touch of sour but aren’t overwhelming.Peppermint teaPeppermint tea is supposed to help and, if nothing else, your barf will be minty fresh. Amazon has a nice selection including this one from Twinings. This tea from Earth Mama is also really popular. It contains ginger root, spearmint, peppermint, chamomile and lemon balm, plus, it’s naturally caffeine free and organic. Drinking tea also helps increase your daily fluids, which can be hard when you’re feeling crummy.Anise or fennel seedsChewing on these soothes upset stomachs, making them a go-to morning sickness remedy for those who can stomach their strong flavor. I imagine these would also get stuck in your teeth but, if it works, I guess it’s better than perpetual puking.Acupressure wristbandsCheck out Blisslets if you want something a little more stylish that doesn’t make you look like you’re playing a final at Wimbledon. I have a discount code for 20% off. Just use PREG20 at checkout.Still barfy?Speak to your ob-gyn because there are both prescription and over-the-counter medications out there that can curb the pukes. Many people are reluctant to take medication because of the fear it will harm their baby – fair enough – but morning sickness can get pretty serious (dehydration is a big concern) which can also put your baby at risk, so weigh it out.Here are just a few of the more popular prescription medications used for morning sickness:Antihistamines – Many doctors will suggest trying an antihistamine to subdue nausea, but if you find you’d need to pop them like tic tacs, go back in to speak to your practitioner and have them step it up. Just because they are over-the-counter doesn’t mean they are safer than a prescription. Phenergan is a popular prescription antihistamine that is prescribed to pregnant people as well.Diclegis (Diclectin in Canada) – This drug had previously been withdrawn from the U.S. market because it was suspected of causing birth defects. Turns out it was a false alarm and it has been reintroduced in 2013. It’s essentially a combination of B6 and an antihistamine and many doctors have already been prescribing that to their patients in a number of forms (mostly Unisom with allergy medication). It’s also been used safely for decades in other countries so this one sounds solidWhile researching this post I found a lot of women using cannabis to control their morning sickness. It had never occurred to me, but I can see why that would make sense. Hey, I don’t judge, especially someone who’d been vomiting non-stop for nine months. Just be mindful that there isn’t a ton of research on its effects yet.Zofran – This was (and is) a very popular drug used to curb morning sickness. It had been deemed safe for pregnancy by the FDA, however, new studies are now saying that odansetron (Zofran) may be a little iffy. Bring it up with your doctor if you are prescribed it.Finally, there are quite a number of women whose only cure for morning sickness is giving birth, so just know that you’re not alone if nothing is working. Crappy, I know. Hopefully, karma will reward you with an easy-going baby, a kind teenager, and a winning Powerball ticket.How about you? Have you found anything that works for morning sickness?Drop it in the comments and let me know!Related: When Does Morning Sickness Start (and End)?You may be wondering “when does morning sickness start?” once you’ve seen that positive pregnancy test. Check out our poll results from other women.Pregnant ChickenAmy Morrison


Post contains affiliate links. See our disclosure.Pregnancy comes with all kinds of little treats: swelling and varicose veins are just a couple of them.Here’s the deal your heart has with your legs: your heart will pump blood down and your leg muscles and veins will pump it back up.However, blood volume, a growing uterus, and hormones relaxing your body so you can unhinge for birth all contribute to not-so-great circulation. Your legs often can’t handle their part of the bargain and they end up like balloons that have been filled with water and everything is pooling at the bottom.What’s worse is that it’s often exacerbated by sitting or standing for long periods of time – your legs have gravity working against them, not with them. They become swollen, tired and achy and even increase your risk for blood clots (especially when you’re flying).So this is where compression socks and their sexy sisters come into play.If you took that same balloon and held it tightly in your hand, it couldn’t expand as much and it would be easier to pump any fluid back up.Compression socks (or compression hose; pressure stockings; support stockings or gradient stockings) keep everything (you guessed it) ‘compressed’ by being very tight at the bottom and gradually get looser as you go up (sort of like inverted Spanx). It’s like a little elevator to help your legs with their new heavy lifting of fluids to help your heart out – it’s the reason why so many athletes and runners use them.Okay, so now you decide that compression hose might be a good idea, which ones do you get?Thankfully they don’t all look like 1922-Nervous-Hospital tensor bandages anymore. They come in everything from sassy socks to sexy tights.The more coverage you have the better support you get. So more is better, right? Well, sort of. The challenge is that these suckers are hard to get on so you probably want to stick with the least amount of support you need then work your way up. Here are your options:Compression SocksIf you’re dealing with sore loaf-of-bread feet, go with socks. 15-20mmHg is what your average socks come in. Anything above that you’re into Anaconda strength and they need to be prescribed by a doctor.Pro: They are the easiest to get onCon: The compress the smallest areaVIM & VIGRfind out more and buy them hereMediven Assurefind out more and buy them hereNabeefind out more and buy them hereSockwellfind out more and buy them hereCompressionZfind out more and buy them hereFyttofind out more and buy them hereThigh HighsIf you want more coverage then check out Thigh Highs.Pros: You’re covering more real estate without having to go over your belly.Con: They are relying on your upper thigh to stay up. Too loose and they’ll fall down. Too tight and you’ll look like a popped can of Pillsbury Grands. They sound like they’d be sexy, but they aren’t – hey, we aren’t here for the hotness, right?Jobstfind out more and buy them hereTruFromfind out more and buy them hereTightsIf everything hurts from your ankles to your back, go for tights.Pro: Full coverage so they will really help with leg swelling and they just look like tights.Cons: They can be tricky to get on. (And off for bathroom trips.) Imagine control top pantyhose that are controlling ALL the way down.Insigniafind out more and buy them hereA Pea in the Podfind out more and buy them hereTerramedfind out more and buy them hereSock SummaryI have a pair from VIM & VIGR compression socks and I only find the foot portion tricky to get on but the leg part is quite easy to pull up (easy for me to say because I’m not 40 weeks pregnant.)So if you find your lower half is swelling, tired or achy – or you plan on flying somewhere – grab a pair to see if they help.After all, nothing is sexier than saying to your partner, “Hey Babe, how’s about coming over here and putting my compression socks on for me?” (Be sure to cue up the song “Cherry Pie” by Warrant too.)Let me know if you have a pair and what you think of them! I’d love to know!Our next reco: Handling Restless Leg Syndrome During Pregnancy


What is Gestational Diabetes?Simply put, gestational diabetes is diabetes that develops during pregnancy. It is a result of high blood sugar, due to your body not producing enough insulin to counteract the glucose we get from our food.Why does it happen?If I ever write a book about pregnancy it will be called, “Who the hell knows why?”What we do know, is that while you’re pregnant, your body sometimes works against itself in the pursuit of growing a baby.Usually, your pancreas does an adequate job of balancing glucose by producing insulin. When you’re pregnant, your placenta is a cruel taskmaster, creating more and more hormones that cause your body to resist insulin. Undeterred, the pancreas works overtime to produce more insulin. When it can’t keep up, you end up with gestational diabetes.Your pancreas tried, it really did. But pregnancy is a bitch sometimes.Testing … 1 hour and 3Because gestational diabetes has a prevalence of around 9%, all pregnant women are tested for it in routine prenatal care.If you have significant risk factors, you may be tested at the beginning of your pregnancy to get a baseline reading.For everyone else, the first test is called the glucose challenge test and takes place between 24-28 weeks. You will be given a syrupy drink glucose drink (frequently referred to by the name “Glucola”) that you have to choke down in a specific amount of time.Glucose drinks are the devilYou know how some people love pregnancy and never have the slightest hint of nausea? And how before you got pregnant you fantasize that maybe you would be one of those women? I have heard of people who think this Halloween syrup doesn’t taste so bad. Go ahead and imagine yourself being one of them, but don’t be surprised when you realize it tastes like flat, concentrated orange soda mixed with melted candy corn.I have heard of some providers letting women eat a certain number of gummy worms or jelly beans, etc, instead of the drink of misery. That’s up to your doctor or midwife.After one long hour of orange-flavored burps, you will have your blood drawn to see how your body dealt with that influx of glucose.In a day or two, you should find out if you passed or failed. Failure just means you have a higher than average risk of gestational diabetes. The one-hour test is not diagnostic. In fact, different clinics and offices have different cutoffs for what is considered “failing.”True story: I actually avoided the three-hour test in my second pregnancy by risking out of my original provider and ending up at the high-risk clinic, where the threshold was different. I don’t really recommend this as a solid plan, though.What does it mean to fail the one-hour glucose test?It means more orange-flavored sadness syrup! It’s called the Glucose Tolerance Test, and this time, you get the pleasure of fasting beforehand and drinking twice as much. You have your blood drawn before you drink, and again every hour for three hours. You can’t have anything to eat or drink during that time. I wish I could say that it wasn’t so bad, and in the grand scheme of things it wasn’t exactly traumatic, but it definitely wasn’t fun. Hangry pregnant women are rarely fun.Some people hate the idea of the three-hour test enough that they would prefer to move along as though they have gestational diabetes. This means routinely checking blood sugars and eating a healthy diet. That is another option you could discuss with your provider.If you fail the three-hour test, you will be diagnosed with gestational diabetes.Risk factorsAge: Women over 25 are more likely to develop gestational diabetes. That really narrows it down for a lot of us, I know.Health history: If you have prediabetes, or have a close family member with type 2 diabetes, you are more likely to develop gestational diabetes. Your risk also increases if you have had gestational diabetes in a previous pregnancy, if you had a baby who weighed more than 9 pounds (4.1 kg) at birth, or if you have had an unexplained stillbirth.Weight: Women with a BMI over 30 are at increased risk.Race: Women who are black, Hispanic, American Indian, or Asian are also at increased risk.Gestational Diabetes SymptomsFor many women, there are no noticeable symptoms, which is partially why we are all tested. The ones that do show up can sometimes be written off as a normal part of pregnancy.Unusual thirstFrequent urinationFatigueNauseaFrequent vaginal, bladder, and skin infectionsBlurred visionSugar in urine (don’t drink your pee, your doctor would be the one to catch this symptom)Risks to babyMacrosomia – aka “a really freaking big baby.” This can lead to shoulder dystocia, which is when the baby’s shoulders have trouble getting through the pelvis. You could also be at an increased risk of needing a c-section.Preterm birthRespiratory distress syndromeLow blood sugar, which comes with a risk of seizuresLater risk of type 2 diabetesRisks to motherHigh blood pressurePreeclampsiaFuture diabetes riskGestational diabetes treatmentFrequent monitoring of blood sugarDiet and exercise. (This gives you an idea of what type of diet you’d follow)Between 10 and 20 percent of women with gestational diabetes will need supplemental insulinYou will likely have your blood sugar tested after delivery and again at the six-week postpartum visitPreventionDiet and exercise is the answer to pretty much everything. Need to lose a few pounds? Diet and exercise. Need to lower your blood pressure? Diet and exercise. Depressed? Anxious? Got a wicked hangnail? Diet and exercise.TakeawayGestational diabetes is a common pregnancy condition that comes with a significant set of risks.It is diagnosed through the Glucose Tolerance Test.It can largely be controlled for most women through frequent blood sugar monitoring, diet, and exercise.Some women will need supplemental insulin.It generally resolves after pregnancy but does carry an increased risk of type 2 diabetes later in life for both mom and baby.Further reading:Mayo ClinicDiabetes.orgAmericanPregnancy.org


When I found out I was pregnant, in baby-hazed euphoria, my appetite for prenatal information was as large as my real appetite. I gobbled up pregnancy blogs and books like Cookie Monster goes to town on his favorite chocolate chips. I can pretty much quote What to Expect When You’re Expecting from cover to cover.In all my reading, I kept seeing the same thing. Early pregnancy may be miserable, but the second trimester is a glorious light at the end of the tunnel. Your hair gets shiny and long. Your nails never look more beautiful. You no longer look fat, you actually look pregnant!But best of all, the second trimester is called the ‘honeymoon trimester.’Why?Because apparently your libido surges out of control, and all you want to do is get it on.As I battled morning sickness, fatigue and feeling like general death during the first trimester, the second trimester became my beacon of hope. This too shall pass! One day I will feel sexy again!Now that I am about midway through the second trimester, I definitely feel like someone owes me an apology. The second trimester isn’t the total sexfest I thought it was going to be.In the first trimester, I didn’t want to have sex because I was sick and tired most of the time. Now, I have more energy and feel more like myself, but my libido did not get the memo.I (and my poor hubs) feel cheated. I thought the second trimester was going to be a golden three months of sexcapades, before we have a tiny screaming milk monster on our hands.But no.I tried to get in the mood. I read smutty romance novels. I watched Fifty Shades of Grey. But nada. Not so much as a tingle down there. Drier than the Sahara on a good day.Despite what the books say, low libido after the first trimester is incredibly common. If you’ve experienced vaginal bleeding in the past, you may be afraid to risk having sex. You may be just too worn out from growing a human to even think about getting it on. Sometimes though, low libido can signal a hormonal imbalance or even low thyroid function, so it is worth mentioning to your doctor. As for me, my doctor says I’m just one of the lucky ones, and that my sex drive will likely return. While I am glad to know this is normal for most women, it doesn’t exactly make me feel better.You know what would make me feel better? Getting laid.Many women feel that there’s something wrong with them if they don’t suddenly start acting like hormone-crazed teenagers by the second trimester. All the books tell you one thing is supposed to happen, and you don’t understand why it’s not happening for you.But it’s ok. I know that some day my sex drive will return. And the following sexfest will be fifty shades of awesome. In the meantime, I remind myself that this little nugget taking over my womb is totally worth the dry spell.Related: Sex After Childbirth – 7 Unsexy Truths


I had a dream/nightmare a few nights ago that I was on a talk show that had an entire audience of pregnant women. I was so excited to talk about pregnancy and my asshattery when a woman went into labor.Of course, no one in the audience knew anything about delivering a baby – no doctors, no midwives, no L&D nurses, nothing – so everyone just assumed I could do it and I got that same pant-shitting feeling when I’m in my underwear at high school and there is a math exam for a course I didn’t know I was enrolled in.Anyway, I thought others might be interested in brushing up on the steps for delivering a baby too, so here we are. I mean what if you go into labor in the middle of nowhere, or when the elevator is out, or when the zombie apocalypse hits!? You can’t get to a damn hospital when the zombie apocalypse hits! That’s where the zombies will go first!So grab a pen and let’s get ‘edumacated’!Here are the basic steps for delivering a baby:Step 1: Don’t Freak Out.I know, easy for me to say with a zombie apocalypse happening, but it really is true that women do this every day squatting in a field somewhere. Childbirth, as terrifying as it can seem - especially if it's happening unexpectedly - is still natural. So try not to lose it even if you are alone. Step 2: Call for HelpIdeally, call 911. This isn’t because birth is an emergency, this is because you need to talk to someone that isn’t going to scare the shit out of you or start crying. Sometimes the scariest part of doing something is doing it alone. So get on the horn and get someone in your corner regardless of if you’re delivering someone’s baby, or delivering your own. If you think you can get a hold of your midwife or doctor instead, go for it, but get someone on the phone who can help you figure out what stage of labor mom is in, and what might be coming next. (Fun fact, the stages of labor don't end with the arrival of the baby.)Step 3: Unlock the Front Door or Pull the Car OverUnlock your front door so help can get in without you having to leave the situation. As for a car, there is kind of a moment where you realize this is happening, so there’s no point in barreling down the highway and flying through red lights. More than likely mom is going to have to take her seatbelt off and that is not when you want to be driving like someone out of Grand Theft Auto. If you are the one in labor and behind the wheel, I’m going to go out on a limb and say that a person exiting your body is distracting and you’d be best to pull over.Step 4: Get Prepared and Take Mom’s LeadIf you have time, wash your hands with soap and warm water or use some hand sanitizer. It seems like a no-brainer but I can see how that could easily be forgotten in the thick of things. Feel free to throw the shower curtain on the bed and cover it with clean sheets or towels, however, if mom wants to squat, lie down, sit in a chair, or be propped up with pillows while howling to Fleetwood Mac, let her do it. If she doesn’t care, the best spot is probably is floor because you can’t fall off the floor if you’re a slippery baby.The most important thing is that mom is comfortable. You can clean/burn anything that gets dirty if you have to so don’t get all damn twitchy about amniotic fluid splashing on your leather car seats because, believe me, she would rather not be giving birth there either.Oh, and if you're wondering, right around now is probably the beginning of the second stage of labor, when the cervix is fully dilated to 10cm, mom is having regular, strong contractions every 45-75 seconds, and she's feeling the urge to bear down and push. Step 5: Get Ready to CatchYou are just catching so when you see the head starting to emerge, don’t be pulling anything. Slow and steady is what you’re going for here. Let gravity and contractions do their thing as the baby works their way from their cozy home in the uterus down through the birth canal. Your job is to simply cup the baby’s head with your clean hands and support it as it comes out. The baby will turn as it is delivered.Step 6: Deal with the HeadAfter the head is out of the vagina, use a clean towel to wipe away fluid and membrane from the baby’s airway by stroking downwards on the nose and mouth.If the umbilical cord is wrapped around the baby’s neck, don’t worry about it. If the cord is tight just keep the baby’s head close to the mother’s body and untangle the baby as it emerges. Don’t worry about cutting the cord either.Step 7: Catch the Rest of the BodyNext, the baby’s shoulders will come (again, don’t pull), then the body. This will be pretty fast so don’t grab your phone for a “look-at-me-delivering-a-baby” shot because you will just get a shot of you dropping a newborn.Babies are really slippery, so have a towel/coat/t-shirt/ to catch the baby. There will most likely be fluid and blood that comes with it too – that’s normal so don’t worry.Once the baby is out, try to dry them off as best as you can to get them really breathing (don’t worry, they are sturdier than they look). Then put the baby on mom (ideally on bare skin for some skin-to-skin contact) and keep them both warm with dry towels or blankets.Don’t slap the baby on the bum. I don’t know where that came from but nobody does it so don’t.Step 8: PlacentaWelcome to stage three of labor, the afterbirth! Your job is most likely done at this point, and you can take your “I-just-delivered-a-baby-shot”, but if help still hasn’t arrived, you may need to deal with the placenta.The placenta is usually delivered 10-15 minutes after the baby (with more contractions), so don’t pull or push on anything to get it out. If it does come out, just wrap it in a newspaper or a towel – it will need to be examined by a medical professional to make sure there aren't any issues. Even though you can technically cut the cord now, it’s best to leave it intact for a pro because everything you need to cut it should be sterile.If no help is coming because the zombies ate them, you can wait until the cord has gone white and hard (long after it has stopped pulsating – we’re talking hours here) and cut it with a sterilized knife or scissors approximately four inches away from the baby. But again, don’t do this unless you really, really have to.Step 9: The Fourth Stage of Labor: Rest and RecoverHopefully at this point help has arrived, either in the form of a midwife who will tend to you at home, or you've made it to a birthing center or hospital. In the fourth and final stage of labor, you'll need to rest and give your uterus time to contract and stop bleeding. Breastfeeding helps this, but again, at this point you'll hopefully be being cared for by someone in the know, and not hiding from zombies in a boarded up prison.To sum up how to deliver a babyWhen it all comes down to it, there’s only really one step to delivering a baby, just let nature do what it’s supposed to do and don’t try to speed it up, make it stop, or pull it along. Above all don’t panic. Most births are completely normal and don’t need any kind of intervention so try not to fiddle or recreate a Grey’s Anatomy episode.I also found a wonderful resource from the American College of Nurse-Midwives that goes into more detail if you’re interested. You can download the pdf here.There. We’re all ready. Now we can all go on the talk show.Do you have a story about delivering in an unconventional way?Let us know in the comments below! (And if you just love birth stories, here are 9 Unique Birth Stories proving just how incredible, brave, and strong birthing people can be!)Our next reco: Happily After Giving Birth – 10 Things They Don’t Tell You


So just to simplify, breech is when your baby is bum down and not head down which is the way you want them pointing come show time. Almost all babies reach this head down (cephalic presentation) in the last few weeks of pregnancy but some babies are stubborn little buggers and they don’t want to move.Here are a few ways I found to *encourage* them to get moving and seeing how every technique seems to have a name, I’ve assigned a few of my own.How to turn a breech baby naturallyDrink plenty of fluids.Seriously? Is there anything on the planet that this isn’t a tip for?!The Drunken Turtle:Lie on your back, elevate your hips with a pillow or cushion, and rock gently side to side. Do this a few times a day for around 10-15 minutes each time.The Down Down Dog:Get down on all fours and then lean down onto the lower half of your arms, so your bottom is sticking up in the air. Stay like this for around 10 minutes or until someone comes in the room to make fun of you.The Brazilian Beetle:Lie flat on your back stick a pillow under your bum so that it’s 9 to 12 inches off the floor. Stay in this position for five to 15 minutes.The Sweaty Vampire (Breech Tilt):Get an ironing board or a large piece of wood and prop it at an angle against the couch.  Stick a pillow under your neck and lie on the board with your head down and feet resting on either side of the board on the couch. Try it for up to 20 minutes, 3 times a day.The Gullible Maid:Cleaning floors on your hands and knees was offered up on many sites although, I think a better idea would be to open a bag of M&Ms, throw them around the room, then spend an hour or so crawling around the floor eating them. (We could call it The Hungry Hippo!)The Gritty Kitty:Start with all fours, then lay your head and chest flat on the floor with your bum in the air, as you round your back and return to all fours. Try to hiss, “My precious” when you come up.The Ice Ice Baby:Stick a frozen bag of peas on top of your belly for about 10 minutes. The cold on the head may encourage the poppet to swim to the bottom.The Crotch Song:Play nice music at the bottom of your belly or have someone with a nice soothing voice talk around there (like that guy that looks like Jason Momoa at the grocery store). The thinking is that the baby will follow the sound.The Nickelback Effect:Play abrasive music at the top of your belly and the thinking is the baby might move away. I don’t know why I think this one is kind of mean, plus, what makes anyone think they know the taste of this baby – they may love thrash metal and Barry Manilow.The Chill and Thrill:Try a combination of Ice Ice Baby and Crotch song, “Damn, my head is cold, wait….is that Daddy’s voice I hear? I’m gonna check that out”The Underwater Piñata:Do handstands in a pool or dive in repeatedly.The Big Lebowski:Place a sheet or towel under your bum as you lay on the floor. Have someone (preferably Jason Momoa again) lift up on the corners of the sheet and shimmy you from side to side. Do this for about 5 minutes. Then you kneel on the stairway landing. Walk your hands down 2 or 3 stairs into an all fours position. Remain in this position for about 5-10 minutes or as long as comfortable and try not to fall down the stairs.The Sugar Rush:Have a glass of juice or something high in sugar to get your baby jumpin’ and lie on your side with your hips raised higher than your feet. Note: While this may be a good idea to combine with some of the other moves, keep in mind that you might be upside down and what goes down might come back up.The Happy Moth:Move a flashlight slowly down from the top of your stomach toward your pubic bone while you are in a Sweaty Vampire position.The I Belieeeeeeeve:Visualize your baby moving into the correct position while doing the badass moves listed above.The Mind Bender:One small study found that women who are regularly hypnotized into a state of deep relaxation at 37 to 40 weeks are more likely to have their baby turn than other women. Find a skilled hypnotherapist for this one though and not creepy Uncle Eddie.The Hippy Herb:Some sites recommend homeopathic pulsatilla in 200C potency or higher taken every day for three days. It’s made from a fuzzy herb called wind flower. Check with a doctor for this one though.The Bug Rub:Starting at the bottom of your tummy, move your hands clockwise around the side of your bump. Continuing clockwise, go all the way around until you’ve come full circle. Massage gently as you would to apply lotion. Massage for ten minutes or more up to several times each day or until your belly shines so you can see your reflection.The Poor Man’s Acupuncture:Place a clothespin on the baby toe of each foot at the outside corner of the toenail so that the toenail and toepad are stimulated for 30 minutes per day. You can also do this with just finger pressure.Webster Technique:You need a trained chiropractor for this one. The back cracking technique relieves pressure from the pelvis and help loosen the ligaments and muscles around the uterus to encourage the baby to turn. Some people have had really good results with this.Moxibustion:Practiced in Eastern medicine by trained acupuncturists, this technique burns mugwort near the acupressure point of your pinky toes to help turn a breech baby. Again, this one sounds like it has an impressive success rate.External Cephalic Version (ECV):This is when a qualified doctor or midwife tries to turn you baby by manually manipulating your belly to spin your baby to face down. It is typically done after the 37 week mark when the likelihood of your baby turning decreases. This one doesn’t sound very comfortable but it looks like it works fairly well if you have someone that knows what they’re doing.A reader passed along this excellent site called Spinning Babies that goes into many of these moves in further detail and with diagrams, videos and pictures.Having a baby in a breech position used to mean an automatic c-section for you. However, the medical establishment seems to be changing their mind on that one. The trouble is that there is a whole generation of doctors that don’t know how to deliver a breech baby so you may have to poke around to find someone qualified if you want to go for a vaginal breech birth.That said, it is still ideal for your baby to be bottoms up for delivery so good luck on getting those kiddos upside down!Have you had any luck with turning a breech baby naturally?Let me know in the comments!Our next reco: 5 Things This Mama Wants You to Know About Her Unmedicated Birth5 Things I Want You to Know About My Unmedicated BirthMelissa got the birth she was hoping for but knows that it wasn’t easy. Here are 5 things she wants you to know about her unmedicated birth.Pregnant ChickenMelissa Sheridan


Post contains affiliate links. See our disclosure.I think I can, I think I can, I think I can… the final (ahem!) push is on until your baby arrives and changes your world forever. While your hormones have probably already brought on some major nesting, your pregnancy brain might leave you feeling like there’s something you’ve forgotten.  (And there inevitably is.)  Here’s my list of 20 must-dos for the last month of pregnancy.Last month of pregnancy checklist:1. Treat yourself to a mani/pedi.Not only do you deserve some pampering, but your hands will feature prominently in a zillion photos of your new bundle of joy. Plus, you’ll likely be doing a bunch of shuffling around in flip flops post-labor.2. Pack a “going home” outfit for baby.You’ll most likely keep your newborn swaddled in (awesome) hospital blankets until you head home, so no need to bring cute outfits for wearing in the hospital, but don’t forget to pack that Instagram-worthy outfit and hat.  #Homewardbound!3. Go on a date…or 6.It’s tough to predict when you’ll next head out solo with your significant other. Take advantage of the last few weeks by doing things as a couple before your family grows by one or (eek!) more.4. Upgrade your phone storage.You are about to become the next Anne Geddes, at least in your world, taking so many photos and videos of your baby that you’ll hit your storage max quickly. Don’t let that video of your baby’s first coo get cut off because you feel too guilty to erase the 75 pictures you took of the first stroller walk.  (Online journal apps like Tinybeans can be a lifesaver.)5. Speaking of photos, research a newborn photographer.Get some recommendations from friends, then get the low down on fees (there can be a big difference between the cost of having them taken and actually getting them printed). Photographers like to do these in the first two weeks of life, so do the legwork now so you’re not scrambling to hire one in a sleep-deprived, zombie-like state.6. Ask for a foot rub.Cankles or not, propping your feet up and having them rubbed will feel ah-mazing. Your significant other or anyone within arms reach of your perch on the couch will do.  (You’ve earned it – and it’s pretty hard to turn down a woman who can’t reach her own feet.)7. Sign up for Amazon Prime.If you haven’t already, do it now, because ordering baby supplies from your phone and receiving them within two days is one of the greatest conveniences in the modern world.8. Invest in a nice, new comfy outfit.Purchase an outfit that is comfortable and makes you feel good (don’t get too ambitious on sizing), and you can wear it leaving the hospital and when visitors swing by. Grab a headband and some dry shampoo too (here’s a fave), since washing and drying your hair will become a luxury.9. Make new playlists.You’ll never be so grateful to Steve Jobs for putting 1,000 songs in your pocket than when you’re a new parent.  Make a playlist for the hospital, one for car rides or long walks with baby, and one with some soothing, mellow tunes that will keep you and baby relaxed. Your Spotify will be set to Raffi station for the next 6 years, so enjoy your favorites now.10. Fill up your Netflix queue and download some page-turners to your Kindle.Newborns nurse or bottle feed 10 to 12 times a day, for 20 to 30 minutes at a time (and that’s once you both get the hang of it… in the earliest days, it can be an hour or more). That’s a lot of time captive in a glider or on your couch, and we survived it by reading the Hunger Games and re-watching 30 Rock and Arrested Development in their entirety.11. Prepare for the postman.Another item to add to your last month of pregnancy checklist is to purchase thank you note cards – or sign up for a service like Paperless Post – because there’s usually a torrent of baby gifts after baby is born.12. Set up your birth announcement.Whether it’s an Instagram post or physical announcements, figure out what you’re going to write once this kiddo arrives. Minted makes gorgeous baby announcements (with or without photos). They also offer free custom envelopes & recipient addressing so you can have it all locked and loaded before go time. If you use the code PCHX15, you’ll get 15% off your order.13. Tinker.All that gear you bought or received still sitting in its boxes? Set it up and play around with the buttons, straps, and handles. You don’t want to get caught holding a crying newborn while trying to unfold a stroller for the first time with one hand.14. Stock up on staples.Head to the grocery store and grab a bunch of non-perishable items like Granola bars, pasta, cereal… even some of that milk in a box. (Bonus points for anything that can be eaten one-handed.) There will be times in the early days when you can’t get out of the house and will need a quick meal. Don’t forget the coffee and wine, obviously.15. Wash some of the baby’s new clothes.Leave the tags on the rest, because there’s no way to know what’s going to fit (and for how long). Be sure to use gentle detergent, though no need to get fancy; regular ol’ All Free and Clear is a fave.16. Get some noise.Whether its the sound of a fan, the ocean, or even a hairdryer, there’s an app for that, and baby will love it.  Even better, invest in a quality sound machine. The sound doesn’t loop like an app does and the sound tends to be richer – my favorite is LectroFan – then print off some of our free do not disturb signs for your door.17. Research Mommy and Me classes.They may not seem like your cup of tea now, but in a couple of months, being in a room with other moms in your overtired shoes will feel like a lifesaver.18. I need somebody, not just anybody…Help!Make a list of caregivers you’re comfortable with, and let them know they’re on it in case you need emergency coverage in those early weeks.19. Prep some meals.Stock your freezer full of healthy meals so you don’t have the added hassle of figuring out what to do for dinner. Skinnytaste has a great freezer and slow cooker section so you can just dump and go when you’re sick of eating pizza.20. Sleep. Take naps, go to bed at 8pm, sleep until noon… just because you can.Or at least snooze as long as possible until your bladder forces you out of bed.What else would you add to a last month of pregnancy checklist?Let me know in the comments below!Our next reco: Hospital Bag – What to Pack


Post contains affiliate links. See our disclosure.Finding a perfect gift for a new dad can be tricky. You want to find something that's fun or thoughtful but still practical and useful. Whether it’s his first Father’s day, holiday or a gift to say “congratulations on fatherhood”, here are some of the most unique and thoughtful gifts for a guy becoming a dad.Great Gifts for New Dads (or Dads-to-Be):‌The Dad HoodieIt’s like a diaper bag you wear. This super soft hoodie comes equipped with six mesh, stretchy pockets for his wallet and phone, sippy cups, bottle, diapers, wipes and more. I feel like you could also easily tuck a beer and a sandwich in there if you were so inclined. 😉 They’ve come out with a vest version too! You can shop the Dad Hoodie here.Daddy & Me Personalized Board BookUpload your favorite pictures and customize the text with large, easy-to-read type. You can find them on Pinhole Press. (Use the code PREGNANTCHICKEN for 10% off.)Number tracing T-shirtI will take 10 of these, please. They have the car playmat t-shirt as well. You can find them on Etsy.Dad Jokes BookI am ashamed to admit a few of these jokes made me chuckle. It would make a great small gift, stocking stuffer, or even a fantastic pregnancy announcement. You can find it on Amazon.Little Man Big Man T-Shirt SetThese father baby matching sets will never get old for me. Never! I like the ones that still work when they aren’t side-by-side. You can buy them here.Toilet TimerI think we all know a few phone scrolling bathroom hibernators who could use this. A subtle way to say, “shit or get off the pot, sir.”  You can shop them here.Ergobaby Omni Breeze Baby CarrierDads babywearing is a site everyone loves. Keeping comfort in mind, an Omni Breeze is a great product that tends to work well for both mom and dad. Some guys tend to run hot (insert dad joke here) so I’ve picked the most breathable carrier on the market. You can find them here.Custom Baby Go BagIt's no fun to be caught out with no spare diaper when your baby decides to poop up their back. This canvas pouch can hold a diaper, disposable change pad, baggies, hand sanitizer, pacifiers, sunscreen, onesie, socks, mitts, or anything else you might want to have in you glovebox or trunk when an emergency hits. You can find the 'baby crap' bag in the store. We also have 'oh shit' and 'I used to be cool' as well.Chip Off The Old Block Matching ShirtsThese are screen printed by hand on soft tees. I thought they looked really unique. You can buy them here.Custom Story BookWonderbly makes personalized hardcover keepsake books that can be customized with both the child’s name and dad’s (or grandpa’s ) handle. These 34 page books are really gorgeous and do a great job of incorporating the names into the story. The picture here doesn’t do them justice. Wonderbly.Custom Dad PrintMinted is known for their gorgeous cards but they also make incredible prints. You can create a custom piece – right down to size and color theme – to make the perfect art for home or office. You can check them out on Minted here.Paperclip Changing BagIf you’re looking for a REALLY nice diaper bag, I highly recommend Paperclip. Their bags do not skimp on quality or features – it even has an integrated change station. You can buy them here. If you like the idea and want to see more options, you can also check out my post on the Best Gender Neutral Diaper Bags.Custom Night Sky PrintThese made-to-order prints feature the night sky on the date your children were born. I’ve shown the version that has three dates, but you can choose from a variety of setups. You have to print this yourself (they just send the .jpeg) but you can pop over to an office supply store to run off the bigger version and you don’t have to worry about it getting squished in the mail. You can shop for all the options here.DILF MugFunny but subtle so it will go over the heads of most prude relatives. You can find them here.Baby Bonding Activity TokensThis little jar contains tokens like “read our favorite storybook”, “bubble blowing”, etc. to spark some ideas for daddy and baby. Might be fun to pair it with some of the props needs for the activities too. Here’s where to find them on Etsy.Big dipper/Little dipper shirtsI can’t even handle how adorable these t-shirts are. The little dipper comes in sizes as small as 3-6 months and goes up to whatever fits a 12 year old, making it the perfect gift for new dads and old dads alike. You can find them here.Baby Brezza Formula DispenserJust to be clear, this isn’t a dads-are-so-dumb-ha-ha suggestion. If you are formula feeding, scooping and measuring is a giant pain-in-the-butt and if you aren’t the one that is usually scooping and measuring, you have to ask the usual scooper and measurer. This person may be asleep (and should hopefully stay that way) but with this Brezza, any rockstar getting up in the middle of the night just has to hit a button to make the bottle. You can find the formula dispenser here.Daddy’s Little Beard Puller onesieFor those itty bitty hipsters in training. You can find them on Etsy.Father Figure Can CoolerThis fun (and inexpensive) can cooler is a fun gift for any expecting or new dad. I found it on Etsy.Veer CruiserThe Cruiser is cool because you can push it like a high-end stroller or pull it like a wagon – it can even be used with an Infant Car Seat Adaptor. It is rugged yet lightweight, crafted from aircraft grade aluminum, and can accommodate up to 150 pounds, all while weighing less than most double strollers. They are NICE! You can shop the cruiser here or you can read more about it in our review.Pint and Half-pint t-shirt and onesieI also love the Little House on the Prairie reference that some people may or may not get. Either way, this set is a great gift for a new dad. You can find them on Etsy.Dad's Story: A Memory and Keepsake JournalThis guided journal is designed to help dads write down memories that they want to preserve and share with their children. It provides prompts to record memories from their childhood, school years, early adulthood, and more, like: What was your house like growing up? What was your first job? What's something you wish you had done differently? What's the best advice you ever received? It's pretty cool. I found it on Amazon.Breo BoxThese boxes are hand-packed with 5-8 of the coolest tech, home goods, fitness and lifestyle products. I like it for new dads because they are typically filled with items that are used for a little adventure at home instead of needing a 7 hour day trip to try out his new spelunking gear. I received the box shown above and my husband is already obsessed with the PhoneSoap PRO and the SPREADTHAT! II Self-Warming Butter Knife. You can buy a subscription or a single box, but beware – they sell out quickly. Check out Breo Boxes here.Adopt an Anaconda“My anaconda don’t want none unless you got buns, hun!” All kidding aside, charities are a wonderful gift for the guy that has everything. WWF.Let me know your great gifts for a new dad!Leave them in the comments below!Also check out: A Dad’s Guide to Raising Baby Girls


Post contains affiliate links. See our disclosure.There are so many great books for kids that show some extra love to our dads, bonus dads, father figures, grandpas, uncles, mentors, and anyone else who we consider a “dad.” We curated our favorite stories featuring these amazing people.Books that show dads connectingWe often see moms loving snuggles, but what about dads? Let’s show our kids that men are also snugglers and emotionally open too.Dad By My SideBest for ages: 0-3 yearsWhether they're playing make-believe, making you smile, or warding off monsters under the bed, dads are always there when you need them. Debut picture book artist Soosh celebrates fathers with a gorgeously illustrated and moving story about a parent-child bond. You can find it here.Hair LoveBest for ages: 2-7 yearsDaddy shows affection and love to Zuri as he helps her get ready for a very special day. This book is growing in popularity for good reasons - sharing a feminist family and the loving bond between father and daughter. You can find it here.My Papi Has a MotorcycleBest for ages: 4-8 yearsMany times love looks like spending quality time together. This main character loves holding on to her papi while riding on the back of his motorcycle. Together they explore the community they live in and build memories that shape their unbreakable bond. You can find it here.A DIfferent PondBest for ages: 3-8 yearsDad takes his son on a fishing trip and opens up emotionally through his storytelling. He tells his son about his upbringing in Vietnam – how his family fished because it was their means for food and how he lost his brother. This dad’s emotional vulnerability allows for connection with his young son leading the boy to be understanding of why his parents work so hard and the deep love they have for him. You can find it here.Stories that smash toxic masculinityToxic masculinity really does affect all of us. Our culture often reinforces that being a “good man” means being strong and emotionless. This silently trains our kids that there are “wrong” and “right” ways to feel/act, perpetuating harmful gender norms. Here are some stories that combat toxic masculinity and these outdated stereotypes. The BenchBest for ages: 3-8In the Duchess’ debut children’s book, this story is told through the lens of a mother witnessing the deep compassion, warmth and growth of the relationship between a father and son. Lovingly building new norms of trust, peace, curiosity, and more taught by fathers in words and actions. You can find it here.Yo Soy MuslimBest for ages: 3-8 yearsThis story is written in the form of a letter from father to daughter, encouraging her to confidently show up as she is. The main character comes from a multicultural background, navigating the world as both Muslim and Latina. When she faces challenges from others who may not understand, her father reminds her of the beauty in her history, past and present, and that she will have all that she needs in proudly being herself. You can find it here.Books featuring dads caregiving soloWhile there are many stories featuring solo mom’s, it’s very hard to find children’s books featuring dads without a woman present. Let’s show our kiddos the men are solo caretakers too!Jabari JumpsBest for ages: 3-7Jabari is definitely ready to jump off the diving board.  “Looks easy,” says Jabari, watching the other kids take their turns. But when his dad squeezes his hand, Jabari squeezes back. It is unfortunately much too hard to find stories of Black dads emotionally supporting their kids, which makes this title even more of a gem, but it is important to note Jabari Jumps is NOT an Own Voices story.  You can find it here.Ask MeBest for ages: 4-8 yearsA father and daughter spend a day exploring their neighborhood and asking questions to learn more about each other's likes and dislikes and thoughts on the world. It’s a beautiful story about finding connection by just being present and taking the time to be curious about each other. You can find it here.Stories featuring grandfathersFor those families who may still have grandfathers around, these books serve as a beautiful opportunity to connect with elders and let them know they are appreciated too because without them, we wouldn’t be here! You can find it here.Where Are You From?Best for ages: 3-8 yearsWe all crave to know where we come from. In this story the main character is joined by her Abuelo on a journey to discover all the amazing parts of herself and her ancestors. You can find it here.Grandpa GrumpsBest for ages: 4-8 yearsBy Own Voices author, Katrina Moore, Grandpa Grumps is full of delight and joy, as it teaches little ones that not everybody speaks the same language (or love language)! We are delighted to get front-row seats in observing how Daisy grows in her cultural literacy as she gets to know her Yeh-Yeh. Their relationship is a sweet and honest example of how to move beyond language, cultural, and love language differences. You can find it here.Stories featuring fathers who are missedThere are many reasons people miss their fathers, death, deportation, migration, imprisonment, or simply not having a father. Visiting DayBest for ages: 5-7 yearsA little girl misses her daddy but looks forward to heading out with her grandma for “visiting day” where she gets to visit with her daddy away in prison. A story about love between father and child despite the pains of the incarceration system and the hope for the day they are reunited. You can find it here.Mango MoonBest for ages: 5-7 yearsMaricla, Manuel and their mother’s life is turned upside down when their father is deported because he is not a citizen. There is a wide range of emotions from confusion and sadness as they navigate the new norm and carry Papi with them always in their hearts. This story tells of similar real life experiences many in the U.S. encounter. You can find it here.Books featuring two dadsHow fun is Father’s Day when you get to celebrate TWO dads? These stories share the beauty of LGTQI+ families. Papa, Daddy, & RileyBest for ages: 5-7 yearsThe first day of school is exciting until someone at school noticed Riley dropped off by two dads and wants to know who her real dad is. Riley is confused because she has two real dads and loves them both the same. This story reminds us that what makes a family is LOVE while centering a multi-racial LGBTQ+ family. You can find it here.Two DadsBest for ages: 5-7 yearsA story of two dads told by their adoptive child. We love how this story frames and normalizes gay parents, an interracial couple, and the adoptive experience. You can find it here.Books that feature all kinds of familiesEveryone’s family is different and a good way to include and recognize all varieties of fathers or father figures is to read a book that includes them all!We are Little Feminists: FamiliesBest for ages: 0-5 yearsWe wrote this book ourselves because so few books featured diversity in family structure. This picture book focuses on the moments and feelings that make up a family. This book ensures that no child feels left out because all are blessed with families filled with love. You can find it here.What else would you add?Have you come across any other great books that celebrate amazing dads and father figures? Let me know in the comments!ABOUT LITTLE FEMINISTLittleFeminist.com is a children's book and activity subscription that focuses on diversity and gender equality, teaching 0–9-year-old girls and boys (yes, boys can be feminists too!) empathy and perseverance. Books-of-the-month are selected by a team of educators, librarians, and parents, who then create discussion questions and a DIY activity to accompany each book. Little Feminist boxes start at $19 per month.Our next reco: Best Books for Babies (Including Some Hidden Gems)


Do you feel special when you’re pregnant? Well, step aside because a baby is here and people love babies.The dilemma that comes with having this little rock star in your home now is that billions of people will want to come to visit it. Some will be helpful some will not.So here are a few handy tips I’ve picked up along the way so you can show your magnificent little miracle off to the world like Simba in the Lion King.10 Tips for Managing Visitors After Birth1. Don’t let anyone stay with you who you can’t cry in front of or tell to “shut up”.There may be a few people that offer to stay with you when the baby comes. This can be a Godsend or a shitshow. Really think about that person and how much you want them to see behind the curtain. You may be too tired to delicately say, “I know she’s not latching properly but I’m just trying to get the hang of it” and instead say, “See off? You need to fuck right to it!”.When it comes to visitors after birth, you must decide carefully about who you want to be around 24/7 when your inner filter isn’t working at full capacity.2. Spread out the visitorsPeople love to see the baby immediately, or they feel obliged to see the baby immediately. Either way, try to spread them out as much as you can so you can get settled and enjoy everyone’s company long after the fanfare typically dies down. Try not to book too far in advance either, you seriously may feel great the day after you give birth and feel like you've been run over by a combine harvester by week two.3. Go to people that you think will overstay their welcome – don’t have them come to youSometimes this really isn’t their fault. I was one of these people before I had kids because I had no idea how tiring a newborn can be and would sit there gabbing on about some new bar I’d been to while staring into the vacant doll-like eyes of my best friend holding her newborn. I’m sure she wanted to tell me to shut my cake hole and get the hell out of her house but just didn’t have the energy.These are the people you should meet for a coffee or go to their place.First of all, newborns are very portable because they eat, sleep and poop and that’s about it, so take advantage of this window when you can cart them anywhere and they don’t care. Secondly, it’s all on your terms when to pull the chute and you won’t have to drop the little hints that go unnoticed. By the way, some of these single people, elderly uncles, etc. are fantastic to be around because they are often just as self-absorbed as a newborn and it’s sometimes strangely refreshing to talk about something other than babies.4. Put visitors to workSome people are just itching to help when you have a baby and you know what? Let them. These people are like damn border collies and if you don’t give them a task, they get destructive and are liable to chew the leg off a chair or worse, start throwing stuff out. Let them do dishes, tidy up, clean the bathroom, take out the garbage, take your other kids to the park, whatever. Don’t want them seeing your gross underwear? Throw it in your closet and let them deal with the rest of the pile.Just leave *your* to-do list out and if they ask if they can help, just point them to it and tell them to help themselves if they feel like it. Not everyone is comfortable around babies but really wants to help, so give them the satisfaction of doing something for you and just enjoy it and thank them profusely so they don’t start installing a sprinkler system.5. Tag teamRemember the first point? That kind of applies to visitors as well. If they aren’t the kind of person you can lose it in front of, then have a buffer person with you to entertain or deflect if you need to pull a batsmoke. Just have these people over when your partner or close relative or friend is around in case you need to excuse yourself for an hour to cry on the bed for no particular reason (I did this…twice).6. Partner plays the bad copIf you think you’re second string to the baby, just imagine how your partner feels. As I mentioned in the New Dad Survival Guide, this is his chance to shine because I can gua-ran-tee you that there will be some tricky situations when visitors come; like the cousin who announces he’s just getting over the flu in passing conversation while holding your 3-day old infant. Or the great Aunt that insists that the baby needs to be brought out in a snowstorm to meet her book club. Or the nephew that drops by and could “really go for a sandwich”.Dad (or partner or sidekick), it is your job to step up and say, “Oh, hell no.” You know why? Because everybody thinks a protective father is cute and everybody thinks a protective mother is nuts, so do everybody a favor and unhinge.This is also a perfect opportunity for an Al Pacino impression.7. Have visitors bring foodAs my friend’s Jamaican grandmother used to say, “Don’t come wid you two long han”. Which loosely translated to don’t show up empty-handed.Not only should you stagger these people, but try and get them to bring you food. I featured a brilliant website called Meal Train where people can pick a date when they bring you a meal. Not only do you get a dinner that you don’t have to cook, but you get to decide what dates are available so you can control the flow of people. Have them pop it over or sit down and share it with them; either way, they get a baby fix and you get some lasagna. I say win-win.8. Treat it like an Out-of-Office Reply*Sometimes people think it’s nice to pop in to see how a new mother is doing if they haven’t had an immediate response to a message they left an hour ago. This actually isn’t too bad for the people you can tell to “shut up” because you can tell them if it isn’t a good time and their feelings won’t get hurt. For the rest of the population, it is not cool to arrive unannounced at a new parent’s front door because there is no telling what kind of Stephen King nightmare is going on that day.To avoid these awkward moments, I like to treat it like a vacation notification. Change your voicemail and your email to let people know you’re kind of off the grid. It may seem like a no-brainer to you but some people feel the need to constantly “check in”. Just have an auto-reply that says, “Thanks for your email (call). We’re just getting the hang of parenthood so forgive us if it takes a little longer than usual to get back to you. Don’t worry, we’re just fine and loving every minute of it.”I know this may be a little over the top and may feel like the equivalent of adding the dog’s name to Christmas cards (I love that actually) but it’s an easy way of letting them know they’ve been heard.* Obviously, if you’re alone and live in the woods in wolverine country, disregard this advice and be grateful someone is checking to make sure the cat isn’t eating your corpse.9. Pre-PrepDo you think Auntie Barb is going to be a problem? Get your responses thought out NOW or start laying the groundwork NOW. If you think she’s going to show up on your doorstep the day you give birth then start telling her the story of a co-worker’s mother-in-law that showed up the day she gave birth and how awful it was and how you’re so lucky that your family just *gets* that you need a couple of days to settle in. Get an email ready saying, “Auntie Barb, we can’t wait for you to see the new baby! I’m just getting the hang of it so can I give you a call when I come up for air so you can come over and meet her?” then hit *send* when she fires off the first email.10. Go with the flowDoes Auntie Barb still show up? Does your Mother-in-Law that you’ve never met fly in from Poland and set herself up on your couch? Does your sister drop in every day to tell you about the disgusting brunch she had or everything about her wicked pilates instructor?Roll with it and save your energy – like a solar street light on a dimming switch. Ask Auntie Barb to hold the baby while you go have a shower. Say “Dzięki” when your mother-in-law makes dinner then go lie down with the baby. Tell your sister she needs a fucking punch in the throat then apologize and blame it on your hormones while savoring the good vent.The best thing you can do with visitors, a new baby, and I suppose life in general, is to just roll with it.To Sum UpEven though you are now regarded as the remaining husk that brought this precious, perfect gift into the world (you will be asked how you feel as a courtesy but no one gives much of a shit how you are now, so try not to ramble) it’s still your show, honey. So remember, choose your visitors wisely and enjoy the little star that everyone wants to see shine.I also recommend: 20 Things I Learned From My First 4 Months of Parenthood


My great-grandmother always said “babies need air” – meaning that they should go outside every day.I’m not sure if there is any science behind this (she also told me that I’d get kidney stones from sitting on cold pavement) but when I did have a baby, I made a point of going outside every day even if it was just a walk around the block or sitting in on the porch. I think this little custom helped me more than either of my kids because it gave me a bit of purpose in the haze of 24/7 newborn living, but I do feel like it helped set their little internal clocks, so I think she was on to something.It’s a piece of advice I impart (if asked) to other new parents as well, but I wanted to know what you guys would tell a new parent (first-time parents in particular). I was blown away by all the great advice! Nothing will fit you to a tee, but I love the wisdom in all of them.Advice for New Parents (from Parents Who Have Been There)1/ "Whatever phase they are going through will be over eventually!”- Ciarra2/ “The post birth hormones are intense. You might cry simply because the store is out of Greek yogurt and that's ok. Sleep deprivation in the early months is as bad as people say, but like all things with a baby, it won't last forever! And the love you will feel for baby is like nothing you've ever felt before.”- Anna3/ “You will sleep again eventually.”- Sharon4/ “Don't overlook your own recovery. You spend so much time planning for the baby, don't forget that you need to be taken care of too.”- Ashley5/ “Work WITH your baby, not against it. Saves a lot of frustration and stress.”- Kirsten6/ “Don't buy a lot of clothes. They grow so fast that I wish I would've bought fewer pieces for each size.”- Julie7/ “If a baby book instills worry instead of comfort and empowerment, ditch it.” - Ashley8/ “The love is overwhelming. It's a love so big, it hurts.”- Dani9/ “Ignore anyone who tries to make you feel anything but awesome. You will know what's best, or, you will know how to find the answer that works for you and your baby.”- Ashley10/ “Everything is only temporary. You may not love every minute and that's ok. Let go when you can. Do what you can and don't beat yourself up over what you can't. Do what works for you!”- April11/ “If you’re going to be up nursing, find a series to binge watch in the middle of the night. It will help with the lonely feeling that often comes with 3am feeds.” - Kayla12/ “Babies cry. This sounds crazy but I always felt like if my baby was crying I was doing something wrong. Sometimes they just need to let off steam.” – Brittney13/ “It's okay to put the baby down and cry in the other room when you've hit an exhaustion level you never thought possible.”- Christin14/ “Babies aren't supposed to sleep through the night, they're not supposed to eat every three hours on the dot, and there is no magic formula to make them hold to a schedule. Take each day as it comes.”- Audra15/ “There is no such thing as "bad habits" – give your baby whatever it is asking for. You can't spoil a baby.”- Jennifer16/ “Don’t feel like you need to do an official ‘date night’ if you don’t feel like it. My husband and I just wanted to sit on the couch and watch tv after bedtime. Plus, the logistics of a babysitter just added to my to-do list.” - Kaitlyn17/ “If you find your baby’s diapers are always leaking suddenly, it’s probably time to go up a size.” - Sarah18/ “Postpartum depression is real! And really scary! And even knowing it, and trying to reach out for help, it was brushed under the rug by my doctor twice. I loved my doctor, but sometimes it's not just "baby blues" or "you'll adjust"... Sometimes you need more than that and that's ok too. Be honest with yourself about your wellbeing, and be honest with your partner/spouse/best friend/ doctor – even the scary stuff!”- Lauren19/ “The baby blues are a son of a bitch, that feel like they will never end, and then they end.”- Danielle20/ “Everyone is going to give you advice.... breast is best, tummy time, etc. screw it all. Do what's best for you and your family and trust your gut. F the mommy guilt. The first year is all about survival.”- Kat21/ “The irrational irritation that you feel for your pets and partner is just temporary and probably caused by hormones and sleep deprivation. It will pass, don't kill them.”- Jessy22/ “Be prepared for your best intentions and plans to go out the window! Maybe breastfeeding will work for you, maybe it won't. Same goes for your pregnancy, birth plan, baby sleep... What you picture and reality may be very different, and if you can alter your expectations beforehand, it'll be so much easier.”- Susan23/ “My husband's best advice is – never do anything when the baby is asleep that you could do when they are awake. Simple, but so helpful in terms of prioritizing during precious nap time!”- Melissa24/ “I wish more people would've been positive! You hear so much negative ‘there goes your sleep/social life/showers/quiet’ speeches get really old. Having a baby is pure joy even after the hard days and I wish I would've heard more of that. I always make sure to tell new moms to be how amazing it will be!”- Krystin25/ “I know this is meant for first-time mothers, but I wish someone had told me my second child would not be the same as the first. Intellectually, I knew, but I can't responding like they were the same baby. They're different; so is what comforts them, makes them smile, etc. It's worth stating the obvious.” - Justine26/ “That you will figure it out, even if you have NO CLUE what you are doing. You will!” - Michele27/ “Biggest wish I knew was that formula is not poison. I had a low breast milk supply so my baby not gaining weight and waited WAY too long to just get over it and use formula. We are doing much better now.” - Melissa28/ “Really really really try hard not to compare your baby's milestones to others or let others compare their baby to yours. ‘My baby sleeps 12 hours a night and goes poop on command!’ Your baby is great and perfect and will sleep too (someday).” - Jessica29/ “It's okay if you don't bond with your baby/babies right away. It can take time, and it's normal. (No one ever told me, and I felt like an awful mom for the first four months.)” - Kristin30/ “Hold them, watch them sleep, let the laundry pile up, hire a cleaning person to come in occasionally, order take out and do whatever makes your life easier at the moment. You can’t do everything so let others help. Take lots of pics.” - Jennifer31/ “You don't have to love every single second. Some moments you will actually despise. But it is all worth it.” - Elaine32/ “You will have moments where you are overwhelmed, where you may question your abilities. You will be tired and consider (even briefly) waving the white flag. It doesn’t mean you are, or will be, a bad parent. It doesn’t mean you don’t love your child. It’s okay to have these feelings – do not dwell on them. They are fleeting and this too shall pass.” - LauraWhat is the best piece of advice you’d give a first-time mom or dad?Are there any practical tips or tricks you found helpful when you had a newborn baby? What eased your anxiety or what routine made your new life with a baby easier?Our next reco: Baby Sleep Tips from Seasoned Parents


Supporting your partner through something as wild as pregnancy and birth can seem overwhelming. That’s why we polled our Facebook audience to nail down the most helpful things partners did before, during, and after, and as always, you didn’t disappoint.Here’s a sampling of the clever, kind, and downright impressive things partners did to take care of their other halves.How to support your partner through pregnancy, birth and beyondExercise your empathy muscles.“My husband went through a labor simulation with me using a TENS unit to simulate contractions on his abdomen. He agreed to do it so he could physically understand my pain later on, even though, in his words, “I’m sure it still pales in comparison.” When the time came, he was a champion and tended to my every need, and was sincerely involved in the entire process, a rock from start to finish. He was the only one I wanted in the delivery room and the only one I needed (Aside from nurses and doctors who were all awesome as well!) I could never have done it without him, twice so far now!” – MelissaEncourage sleep, even at the cost of your own.“My wife was amazing, during pregnancy she encouraged me to nap. In labour she provided counter pressure and kept me calm and centred. During postpartum I would pump after I put the baby to bed and she would get up and do the first feed of the night so I could get a longer stretch in the first few months.” – CarlyBe their voice when they need it most.“I had to have an emergency c-section, and I told him that he had to be my voice when I couldn’t. After the medication wore off, they gave me a shot of morphine and it didn’t do anything – he called in a nurse and she said she had to get permission from my doctor to give me something else. While I lay in bed, sobbing into my fist to keep from waking my newborn son, he stormed the nurses station and refused to leave until I was given something for the pain. (This coming from a man who wondered if it would be rude to send back a burned meal at a restaurant once.)” – KristineJump in without being asked.“My wife didn’t wait for me to ask for help. She just parented. Changed diapers, bathed the baby, took her out in the stroller so I could shower, washed bedding, put away laundry, etc. She acknowledged that I had the physically and emotionally taxing job of growing, delivering, and breastfeeding, and she took on the other aspects of parenting. And she did it without me needing to be a manager and assign tasks.” – AlannahFeed her (and the baby, too!).“My husband did ALL the cooking for the first 2 months of our sons life. He also takes the night shift from 2am-6am so I can get a stretch of uninterrupted sleep… this is so important for my mental health. He’s never shy to take him when he’s being difficult and always keeping up on daily household chores. I don’t know what I’d do without him.” – SamanthaChannel your inner Zen master.“When it was “go-time” I was amazed how calm and prepared my husband was. I was surprised how nervous I ended up being when real labor started and he was my absolute rock. He knew where all the packed bags were and got loaded up so fast, got me a snack, and called the doctor. He rubbed my feet in the tub while we tried to kill a little time at home before going in and kept me super calm. It wasn’t until several weeks later that he admitted how scared he was and I never would’ve known it.” – EmilyGet creative with your schedule.“My husband and I had/have an awesome system. I sleep better in the morning (like 2am-6am) and he sleeps better early on in the evening (prior to 3am). If the baby would wake up in the first half of the night, it was “my turn” and if it was the second half of the night it was “his turn.” This way we were both sleeping when our bodies did our best sleep.” – ReaganThink ahead.“If you have older kids, partners can put together a plate for the little one’s lunches each day before going to work. Makes lunchtime so much easier for a mom breastfeeding a newborn.” – EmilyWatch what you eat.“Never the eat the last of anything. Ever. In fact if you see the last of something, go to the store and buy two more boxes/bags/crates/whatever of said item.” – SarahTake care of her.“Always was 100% on board with me going out to spend time with friends or whatever I wanted to do to get a little me time in. Being extra patient with me while I recovered/adjusted. Calmed me down if I was overreacting. Answered medical questions that I was in too much pain to answer. Getting up in the middle of the night to feed baby. Third baby and we are a well oiled machine of a team, he rocks.” – LauraGet cozy in the kitchen.“My husband has taken over the grocery shopping and dinner cooking, and this has continued since I’ve gone back to work as well. It is a HUGE relief to my schedule and mind to not have to have that mental inventory of groceries needed, meals to plan, as well as the time spent shopping taking away from my precious few moments with the baby every evening after work before bedtime. Also every time I’ve had a low moment about my body image he has said, simply, “you’ve had a baby.” it helps me keep perspective.” – KateMake sure the intake matches the output.“Keep a new breastfeeding mama fed and hydrated! I always appreciated water and food, sometimes brought to me in bed because I was feeding baby or pumping, more than I could express!” – Lindsay(Related: 20 One-Handed Snack Ideas)Keep her comfortable.“My husband was a rock during labor. We took a Bradley method class and he was a great. Also, I struggled a lot with breast feeding. He recognized that isolating myself in the nursery every time I had to pump was causing me even greater depression and moved my pumping station out to the rest of the house and made me feel comfortable always.” – JessicaUse your manners.“He thanks me for nursing, which was especially helpful when I was doing it every 30 minutes. Literally never feel like my time and energy and dedication is taken for granted. I cannot overstate how good this is. He also did every overnight diaper change, which even if I was awake anyway was such a weight lifted somehow.” – ErickaJust say yes.“Said yes to all of my requests with our newborn – the biggest one that made me realize how much I appreciate him — I wanted to co-sleep because I had an emergency c section and couldn’t get out of bed so he ran out and got a co-sleeper. Never asked when it would end or doubted my ability to keep baby safe at night. Just checked on us through out the night and changed his diaper.” – RachelDo what you’re told (and know when to tell a white lie!)“When I looked at him and said, “I need the epidural,” he pressed that nurse button so quickly! He also told me I didn’t poop when I knew I did.” – StephanieSo there you have it.There are many creative and thoughtful ways to support your partner through pregnancy, birth, and beyond. When it comes down to it, being attentive, kind, and anticipating her needs go a long way – and when in doubt, feed her.Got something your own partner did that was worthy of a shout out, or something you didn’t find helpful? Let us know in the comments below!Our next recos: The Ultimate Hospital Bag Packing Checklist


I felt silly for doing it, but I couldn’t stop myself any longer. During a midnight nursing session, struggling to stay awake and fighting the dread I felt for the day to come, I pulled out my phone and typed in the search bar.“What are you supposed to do with a newborn all day?”They didn’t cover this at the hospital. Oh, they went over car seat protocol and safe sleep practices and what to do if the baby runs a fever. They reminded me to take my pain meds and drink a lot of water and hold the baby like a football while breastfeeding (which I never did, because it felt ridiculous and uncomfortable, and also I hate football).But they didn’t tell me what I was supposed to do with myself — or the baby — in between the frequent feedings and diaper changes and desperately trying to get some sleep.In the first few blurry days, filling spare time was the last thing on my mind. I was just trying to keep my little scrap of humanity alive — and myself, for that matter. My son’s post-birth weight loss and my own dangerous levels of sleep deprivation made for a scary, weepy, hallucinatory few days. The “new baby smell” wasn’t something I even had the wherewithal to look for, but when I could scrape together enough brain cells to string together a complete thought, I berated myself for not appreciating my son’s first days more.(Here’s the thing, though: he will never remember those days. Honestly, I don’t remember much of them, either. He was fed, and warm, and dry, and cuddled, and safe, and that was what mattered.)But once those days were past, and I was just working my way through the first month or so… well, that was when I began to wonder how I was supposed to occupy him. And me.I had a Pinterest account full of colorful, sensory activity ideas. I had a stack of board books to read aloud. I had plans for stroller walks and playground trips and library story-times. But all of these plans required some sort of interaction on the part of my son, or at least the ability to hold up his own head. While he was snuggled in my arms, tucked in the blanket I’d carefully knitted for him, I felt……bored.I’d just come down from an anxious first pregnancy and intensely stressful birth experience. My mind and body had been racing nonstop for the majority of the last year, and maternity leave was a sudden, screeching halt.Some afternoons, I’d hold my son while he napped and then sneak a few chapters of my book. Religiously, I refused to turn on the TV, assuming that I’d ruin my son’s attention span for life if I exposed him to screens too early. I even tried not to let him see my occasional, guilty phone-scroll.My husband, enjoying FMLA and resting sore muscles from a summer of physically taxing overtime work, had no such compunctions. When he was not taking a turn changing or rocking or bottle-washing, he happily played computer games or lay on the couch with a paperback.“We should talk to the baby,” I told him.“About what?” he’d ask. “He can hear us talking to each other, right? That’s good for him.”So I sat and held my newborn and stared at his face and wondered what was wrong with me, that I didn’t find his face more interesting. Was I a detached parent? Was I missing some key component of the bonding process? Or was it simply the fact that newborn faces are not intrinsically interesting for hours on end? Now and then, I unwound enough to read a few pages or watch part of a Sherlock episode with my placid and unbothered spouse (while letting my thoughts flit occasionally to the black-and-white infant flash cards I hadn’t bothered to buy. WOULD I REGRET THAT FOREVER?).And when I couldn’t stand it any longer, I googled, “What are you supposed to do with a newborn all day?”The Internet search results were inconclusive, other than “change, feed, burp, put to sleep, bathe occasionally, repeat.” There was very little in the way of entertainment options.Perhaps this is because newborns are not intrinsically capable of enjoying entertainment for minutes, let alone hours, on end.Nearly two years later, my son is now energetic, well-adjusted, affectionate, and funny. He loves it when I read aloud to him (sometimes a little too much) and has a passionate relationship with the great outdoors. He shows no signs of permanent damage from my lack of experience in entertaining a two-week-old.Looking back, I regret only a few things about his infancy. I wish I’d made a few more freezer meals ahead of time. I wish I’d let myself nap whenever I had the chance instead of frantically feeling as if I needed to constantly check on my son. And I wish I’d turned on the darn TV when I wanted to and rewatched Pride and Prejudice for the umpteenth time. It would have been good for my soul.So, if I could tell a bored, anxious, neurotic new parent any one thing, it would be this:The baby doesn’t care if you want to read your book or watch your show. The baby. Just. Wants. To be held.That’s it. The baby doesn’t need activities and a ton of entertainment or even intentional conversation. Most of the time, the baby is sleeping.It’s okay.The baby is okay.You’re okay.You’re doing okay.And if it makes you feel better to put Netflix on in the background while you rock your sweet, tiny person, then you should go ahead and do that.I promise.It’s going to be okay.How did you occupy your time when your baby was just a little lump of a human?Did you read? Binge shows? Walk a mini-marathon through your neighborhood? We'd love to hear about it in the comments below.Our Next Reco: What you Need to Know About Newborns


I can still remember all the worries we had welcoming our first baby. There were so many unknowns and we wanted to do everything just right. The unsolicited advice from family, friends and strangers was overwhelming and honestly, not very helpful. I wish someone had told me that not everything would come naturally – sometimes you just need some time to figure things out.There will be worries at each stage of parenting, but after 16 years and 10 kids, I’ve learned to trust myself. I hope I can provide a little perspective and experience on some of the most common worries – that really will be okay.1. How can I afford to have all the newest best gear for my baby?With our first, we got an expensive infant car seat. We didn’t pay attention to the weight and height limits of the seat. Our first baby was 9lbs 4oz and 23 inches long, she was technically out of the car seat by 4 months. After that we got a mid-priced seat with a bigger height and weight limit.All of the baby gear checklists can seem daunting with the number of items listed. There are key things that your baby will need but you might be surprised at all things you don’t (like a wipe warmer or a changing table).You don’t have to spend a fortune to get safe and high-quality gear. There are many ways to buy gently used baby gear for a fraction of the original cost, you can ask friends and search Facebook MarketPlace, local secondhand stores, just to name a few. Don’t let social media make you think you need to have the newest, most expensive baby gear. Also, Kirkland (Costco) wipes are the best!2. What if my labor and delivery don’t go according to my birth plan?I had planned to have an un-medicated birth, and really tried to stick to that, however, 10 hours of back labor and I needed an epidural. It is okay to change and adjust your plan mid-labor.After delivering 10 babies, I can tell you to be prepared for the unexpected. Having a birth plan is good, but babies have a knack for doing things their own way, so keeping a flexible mindset is better. And if things don’t go as planned, know that it’s okay to grieve the birth experience you didn’t have and take time to process it.3. What if I can’t breastfeed?Sixteen years ago when I had my first, the mantra was “Breast is Best, period. No one talked about what happens if you have trouble breastfeeding. I took all the breastfeeding classes and couldn’t wait to breastfeed my baby. I was devastated when I couldn’t. I felt like less of a mom and it really affected my relationship with my baby. I felt like formula was a bad word, when in reality it was life giving and life saving to my babies. I found out with my second baby that I wasn’t physically able to breastfeed, as I had Insufficient Glandular Tissue and would never be able to produce enough milk.I wish someone had told me: whether you breastfeed, pump, formula feed or do all three you are a GOOD mother. As long as your baby is fed and healthy and you are healthy mentally and physically the method you use to feed your baby doesn’t matter. Every mother’s feeding journey is going to look different.4. Will I bond with my baby?As I mentioned before I struggled to breastfeed, and it really affected my bond with my baby. I dreaded feeding time because it was miserable for both of us. Once I figured out the feeding portion of things, I could really concentrate on enjoying my baby and looking into her eyes and singing to her.I realized that bonding with my baby wasn’t going to look like a Disney movie. It happens over days, weeks or months. If you had a hard, complicated labor and delivery, feeding is challenging, you have a high needs baby, or you are struggling with PPD or PPA bonding with your baby may take some time.5. Will I ever sleep again?Sleep deprivation is HARD; it made me irritable, angry, and depressed. I quickly learned to prioritize sleep, as much as you can with a new baby.You will sleep again but it might not feel that way, especially at first. When you have your first baby, you realize how important and precious sleep is. Thankfully that newborn stage doesn’t last forever, and your baby will start to sleep for longer stretches as they get older.Make sure to prioritize your own sleep. Go to sleep at night after you put the baby down, take a nap when your partner can watch the baby, if possible, have your partner take one of the nighttime feedings so you can get a few hours stretch of sleep. One night a week my husband would stay up and take both of the night time feeds, having that one night to recharge made a huge difference for me and being able to function.6. How will I juggle everything? New baby, partner, work, household duties?When my husband went back to work after our first, I cried so hard and had no clue how I was going to manage. Through trial and error, I figured it out, how to make a meal while holding a baby, get to the grocery store and other tasks. I am so glad there are options for grocery delivery and pick up – that would have saved my sanity back then.It will take time and some bumps in the road to figure it out, but you’ll get there. Start by sticking to the basics, take care of your baby and yourself. You don’t need to be camera ready or even out of your PJ’s those first few weeks. Delegate anything that you can. Have groceries delivered, accept meals from friends and family, and ask for help from your partner and village to get other things done.7. My friend’s baby is…As a new mom, I definitely fell into the trap of worrying that I was doing something wrong when my friend’s baby was sleeping through the night and mine wasn’t. Maybe my friend’s baby was crawling already and my baby was just learning to sit up. It was with our second baby and experience that I learned not to compare. Every baby is different, even siblings.It is really tempting but don’t compare your baby or yourself to others. What each family has, what they do, how they do it, and when – that’s their business. Comparison will make you sad and will cause you to constantly question yourself. And remember, social media is a highlight reel – not real life.8. Why is my baby not meeting the developmental milestones on the exact day/month that the book/website says?I can tell you from experience that each of my babies developed on their OWN timelines. Half my babies were later walkers, I had some babies that hardly crawled and went straight to walking. There were several that I was concerned about delays and now when you look at them you couldn’t tell who walked and talked first.Milestone guidelines are there to give you an idea of what developmentally happens with babies at that time. There is a several months window that these milestones will occur. It’s not a competition and it’s not a big deal if your baby hits them a little early or a little late. It is good to be aware of the milestone windows and to talk with your pediatrician during well checks.9. What if I am not doing “IT” (parenting) right?I wish I would have trusted my instincts more and worried less about others judgment and advice. Parenting is one of those things that you learn as you go. As you learn your baby’s personality and needs, you’ll develop your skills as a parent.Be patient with yourself, give yourself grace and trust your instincts – there is no one right way to parent. We spend a lot of time talking about preparing and caring for newborns, but not much about preparing new parents On a related note, the birth of new parents is important too and they need to be nurtured.  As a new parent you’ll have an onslaught of unsolicited advice, let most of it wash over you and take in only what is helpful for you and your baby. Ask for help and do your research (from trusted sources).10. Why isn’t my body “bouncing back” quickly?My postpartum recovery has been different with each baby. After my first was born it was like my body was foreign to me, it took me a long time to get used to it and love it. Healthy habits may not make the physical changes as quickly as you might want, but prioritizing my physical and mental health was so important. It took nine months to grow your baby, and it will take time for your body to heal. Every mom’s postpartum journey is different.So, 10 Kids Later, Here’s What I ThinkI have learned that it doesn’t matter which brand of diapers you buy, whether you had a c-section or vaginal birth, whether you formula feed or breastfeed; what matters is that you love your baby, comfort them and take care of them (and you) to the best of your ability.Parenthood is the most wonderful and hardest job that I have ever had. There will be days that you feel like you have it together and other days you will feel like you are crawling through. You aren’t doing “IT” wrong – parenting is that hard and 100% worth it.Our next reco: No Really, Don’t Worry About Your Velcro Baby


Being a parent is hard. When my son was born, I really struggled.Bringing home my little guy was exciting and I loved him immensely. However, what preoccupied my mind in those first weeks wasn’t the ooey-gooey desire to cuddle all day long. Instead, I was fixated on the right way to parent.Reflecting on those newborn days does not bring forth warm-fuzzy feelings, but a pit in my stomach and a clenched jaw. I spent those first weeks, and eventually months, hopeless and in information overload.During frequent nursing sessions, I had ample time to search Pinterest and parenting blogs for advice on sleep training, breastfeeding, parenting styles, age-appropriate play, growth milestones and so much more.Mountains of information exist for a new mom, and I was eager to explore every word. I threw myself into collecting all the mommy info out there. However, my knowledge rampage quickly became problematic, because frequent contradictions exist in the advice.Confusing contradictionsI truly loved my son but feelings of stress, guilt, and failure overwhelmed me. My thoughts often drifted to “What did I get myself into? And, can I please go back to my pre-baby life?” Worse, I couldn’t visualize my life with a baby getting any better.One of my biggest struggles was naptime. Hoping to find clarity, I read two popular books on infant sleep. While they both stated the same facts about infant sleep cycles, they presented two very different methods of building good sleep habits.I internalized that no matter what I did, I was failing my baby.The first one recommends a “sleep, nurse, play” schedule. The author specifically discourages nursing before naps. The reason being that if a baby is nursed to sleep, he is then deprived of the opportunity to learn to self-soothe and fall asleep on his own.Seeming perfectly logical, I quickly adopted “no nursing before naps” as fact in my mind.The second book I read contradicted this “fact” stating that when a baby nurses, hormones are released which promote sleep. Looking back, I should have seen this disparity in the two methods as revealing a truth: every baby is different and what works for one, won’t necessarily work for another.Surrendering to the unknownInstead, I was convinced the first book was right and the other book was wrong. For months, I strived to maintain the “sleep, nurse, play” cycle and my baby took inconsistent and short naps. Often the time spent trying to get my very tired son to fall asleep was longer than the amount of time he actually napped.Around five months, I relinquished and rebelled.I nursed before naps and gradually the struggle subsided. Little guy took naps! Slowly, confidence in my ability to parent began to increase, leading to finally enjoying this whole motherhood thing.My surrender of doing things the right way led to a new freedom and flexibility.Every baby is truly different. A friend, who became a mom shortly after me, was very successful with the “sleep, nurse, play” cycle. Her little one transitioned home from the hospital and took naps like a champ. I watched with envy as the trials with sleep which consumed my first months, were non-issues for her.However, my friend’s battle was with nursing. Every possible breastfeeding issue seemed to surface including tongue tie, latch issues, blocked ducts, and frequent thrush. While extensive info should empower the struggling mom, the stressful contradictions scream loudly here too.Each facet of being a mother is so dissected, analyzed, and then preached that no matter what you research, someone out there will tell you, “This is right and you are wrong.”The most important lessonThrough stress and tears, I learned the essential and helpful truth that every baby is different. Nursing before naps won’t work for every baby and guess what? That is ok! If a strategy flops, it doesn’t mean complete parenting failure. Rather, this allows freedom to find another approach which is a better fit.There is no magic fix to all newborn problems. There is no single method that works for everyone.My advice: question any advice that allows for only one solution. Take a deep breath and let go of parenting the right way. Seek information thoughtfully to learn options. Be flexible and follow that deep, parental intuition. Struggle is normal but circumstances change and there is complete freedom to implement new ideas.True, being a parent is hard but with freedom and flexibility, being a parent is also amazing!What’s one piece of advice that’s tripped you up, but you’ve learned to let go of? Let us know in the comments.Our next recos: New Mom Guilt: Why You’re Not Failing as a Mother






Okay, so you got your positive pregnancy test (insert whatever emotion you are currently feeling here). Naturally one of the first things you’re going to want to do - after washing your hands - is figure out when this little babe is going to make their grand entrance. When it comes to calculating your due date, there are a few key factors that will help give you an idea of when the big day might be.Things that are helpful to know:- First day of your last menstrual period- Your average cycle length- Date of conception or embryo transfer- If you’re carrying a single embryo, or if there are twins (or triplets!) in thereOf course even not knowing any of these things, your medical practitioner should be able to give you a pretty good idea of how far along you are either by performing a first trimester ultrasound, or a blood test at your first prenatal appointment. But if you’re a ways out from that appointment and want to get a general idea, a due date calculator can help!How a Due Date Calculator WorksAssuming your cycle is 28 days, that means your luteal phase - the time after ovulation, where an egg travels down the fallopian tube chancing an encounter with a sperm - typically happens around day 12-14 of your cycle. This is your window of opportunity, and is the time frame where fertilization generally occurs. But for those who have longer or shorter luteal phases, conception can happen several days in either direction of this window, moving the due date accordingly. A due date calculator uses these numbers and gives you a rough estimate that doesn’t take into account any other factors that can influence your due date. Fortunately, this is just one calculation method, with several others that can produce more accurate estimates.Naegele’s RuleThere are a few schools of thought about how to get the most accurate due date, but the most common method, Naegele’s Rule, is made by counting out 280 days from the start of your last menstrual period. Just like any due date calculator, this one isn’t exactly perfect since it makes the assumption that you have a 28-day cycle, but it’s a fairly good place to start.A Slightly More Comprehensive MethodThe Mittendorf-Williams rule predicts the average due date to be 288 days from your LMP, and uses 16 factors that may have an influence, like age, medical history, and ethicity to name a few. Studies suggest it is twice as accurate as Naegel’s Rule, but again, all due dates are a rough estimate of when the baby will be here, rather than a hard and fast rule.Are Ultrasounds the Most Accurate Method?According to ACOG (the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology), the most accurate way to establish or confirm gestational age is an ultrasound where precise measurements are taken of the embryo or fetus. Ideally this occurs at or before 13.85 weeks of gestation. That said, while knowing gestational age is a huge help in predicting when your baby will be done cooking, it’s still just an estimate, and your baby may come before or after the provided date.What If I’ve Had IVF or Was Otherwise Medically Assisted?Pregnancies that require a little help from your friendly gynecologist can complicate using a due date calculator because of a few factors, even if you know your exact conception date. The age of the embryo when they were transferred, if it was a day-three transfer or a day-five transfer, if it’s multiples - all of these things can make determining an accurate due date with a generic calculator tricky. Fortunately, your medical provider can give you a much more accurate date at (or possibly even before) your first prenatal appointment. But Still - It’s Just a GuessNo matter what method you use for calculating your due date, only about 4% of babies are born on their actual due dates, and designating a birth month is a more accurate (albeit more annoying) way to think about things.Babies. Unpredictable and teaching us patience and flexibility literally from minute one. Let the games begin, right?!Was your baby early, late, or show up on their due date?Let us know in the comments below!Related: 23 Early Signs and Symptoms of Pregnancy


Becoming a mother is the single biggest shift in identity, daily life and routine I have ever experienced. The postpartum period is particularly acute in demonstrating this shift. You go from the fantasy of motherhood you had always imagined to the reality of 4am feedings and clipped comments with your partner while the baby sleeps.In a word, it’s overwhelming. Yes, it’s beautiful and amazing and joyous, too. But it’s a lot to manage at first. In retrospect, I did some things right to get me through that time of overwhelm that were a tremendous help.Seven Ways I Helped Myself as a First Time Mom1. I joined a mom’s groupI will spend my life extolling the virtue and beauty of a new mom’s group if it convinces one other new mom to do this for herself. At around the two-month mark, I was feeling more exhausted and overwhelmed than I had ever been in my life. I was lonely, anxious, and just so, so tired. I had no idea if what I was feeling was normal, if it was okay, if what I was doing to keep my baby healthy and happy was enough. I searched, found, and joined a mom’s group on a random afternoon after cluster-feeding had me crying on the floor while my husband was at work. I was nervous to go, but my loneliness and isolation outweighed any fear I could have had. Having other moms to talk to, witnessing the variations of normal, seeing how other moms do it and talk and are, not to mention the friendships both my son and I developed from it, helped save me from myself.2. I made consistent plansOnce I had mom friends, I had other people home on maternity leave to hang out with! We made lunch dates, playdates, coffee dates, walk dates. I had a reason to get dressed, put on a little make-up, leave the house. We would plunk our kiddos on blankets, or walk them around in our strollers or baby carriers and chat, eat, and just be together in solidarity while getting fresh air. As an introvert and homebody, it’s really easy for me to chill at home and not realize that days have gone by without having talked to another human adult (other than my husband). This was true before I had a baby. With a baby and all the things you need to bring? I needed to have plans with other moms who would know which restaurants had changing tables in the bathrooms, who also had to stop every ten minutes to nurse. It made a huge difference to have a reason to get out of the house.3. I was honestI love being a mom. I miss those baby days with my son on a visceral level. It was also an overwhelming struggle at first. I made no secret of how hard it was for me. Yet, I didn’t sink deep into it because I just talked about it constantly. I sourced it and floated it to my husband, my friends, my family, my new mom friends.By talking about it, these people were able to validate, support, normalize and ultimately help shoulder those feelings. I let it be okay that I wasn’t always okay. If I had sugarcoated or pretended like I was only fine, like everything was perfect, it is likely would have drowned in it instead of having moved through it relatively unscathed.4. I slowed down & let people helpAfter a while, I stopped trying to live the way I had before I had a baby. I fully accepted that this new rhythm, the baby rhythm, was the new normal, and it lasted far longer than those first few months. I couldn’t accomplish a bazillion tasks in one day anymore. I stopped trying to do it all. If we made it to the end of the day dressed, fed and alive, I was happy. Dressed wasn’t even really a priority some days. I said ‘yes’ to anyone who offered to bring groceries, meals, babysit. I let my sister wash my dishes, I accepted houseguests without vacuuming first. I napped with my son and let tasks pile up uncompleted. I let my baby be the priority, downshifted all expectations of myself, and tried to be as present to that phase as possible. It was a phase, after all, and it passed in a blink.5. I urged my husband to take over whenever possibleBecause I decided to stay home with our son, I was on duty 24/7 for many months. This meant I was more adept at some things, more in tune with our son, faster at all the tasks associated with the baby. But once my husband was home from work, I would check out for a bit. I needed a break to shower, scroll my phone, go for a walk, call a friend, not have a baby on my person. This also became their special time that we still utilize to this day. When Daddy gets home, Mama goes to write and have “leave me alone” time, and they play, go to the park, or listen to music. It’s awesome bonding time for them, and I get a much-needed break as well.6. I sleep-trainedSay what you will. By eight months, my husband and I were so insane with sleep deprivation, we couldn’t see straight. I was still nursing around the clock, I was awash in hormones all the time, we were at each other’s throats and we were all three starting to lose it. My sister, a hippie mother of three who I anticipated would be the last person to support sleep-training, sent me a book that changed all of our lives – The Sleepeasy Solution. (affiliate link)Our son went from waking up all night long to sleeping through the night in literally two nights. He had been as ready as were. It wasn’t cruel, it wasn’t traumatizing, it was the exact right move for our family. We have been sleeping and immeasurably happier for it ever since.7. I listened to my gutAs with all things in parenting, there is no one thing that is going to work for every parent and every kid. I’ve learned that being in tune with yourself, your child, and your spouse is about all you have control over. When things go awry, or issues come up that throw a wrench in an otherwise functioning system (i.e. sleep, sickness, travel), I would slow down, listen to my gut, and proceed from there.Whatever it takes to get you through that first year healthier and more in love with your new life as a mom, do it. Take care of you, listen to yourself, and make sure you aren’t at the bottom of your list.Our next recos: Advice to Myself the Second Time Around

